---
layout: post
title:  "What is a Product Staff Engineer?"
date:   2024-09-02
categories: technology
---
How can a product-focused engineer fit into the role of Staff Engineer? What
tools and expertise can they leverage to provide organizational impact? In this
post we will define what a Product Staff Engineer is, and how they might realize
this impact.

## What is a "Product Engineer"?

Let's start by defining what a Product Engineer is and does. A Product Engineer,
as the name implies, focuses on the **product** experience. This work often
involves converting detailed product and UX requirements into working software.

These developers often work closely with Product, Design, and Product Analytics
stakeholders to understand how users are interacting with the product, iterate
on the existing product experience, and implement new product experiences.

This work is typically full stack work, so Product Engineers may be frontend,
backend, and/or fullstack experts.

### Product vs Platform Engineering

To understand what a Product Engineer is, it can be helpful to understand their
role contrasted with Platform Engineering.

Where Product Engineers focus on developing the product, Platform Engineers
focus on the **platform** that supports the product. The end users of Platform
Engineering work are often Product Engineers, while the end users of Product
Engineering work are the product's end users.

For example, Platform Engineers may support the database health and development,
tooling for metrics and observability, experimentation platforms, payment
platforms, and much more.

Product Engineers build product experiences on top of the infrastructure and
platform tooling built and managed by platform teams.

## What is a "Staff Engineer"?

Staff Engineering is a leadership role, typically very different from a Senior
role in software engineering. A Senior Software Engineer will certainly have
leadership responsibilities of varying scope - they may be the primary technical
owner if some project, or may be responsible for mentorship across their team.

Staff Software Engineers differ from Senior engineers in that the scope of their
impact is scaled more broadly across their technical organization and beyond.
Staff Engineers may *also* be technical project owners, but may also be
expected to guide organizational change, identify and execute on impactful
technical initiatives, resolve blockers and inefficiencies that impact their
technical organization, and much more.

The reason that defining *what* a Staff Software Engineer is and does is such a
common topic across Staff-plus resources is that the scope is broad and
undefined, and it is often up to the Staff Engineer to identify and justify the
work that they spend time on.

### The Staff Engineer Archetypes

[Will Larson's book, *Staff Engineer: Leadership Beyond the Management Track*](https://staffeng.com/guides/staff-archetypes/)
describes the four common archetypes of Staff-plus roles:

- **The Tech Lead**. This role exists within the scope of a single team to guide
  execution and technical approaches.
- **The Architect**. This role is responsible for technical direction and
  quality within a subject area, providing expertise and leadership to address
  the needs of the project.
- **The Solver**. This role focuses their efforts on arbitrary and/or high
  complexity problems. They may remain in one primary space or move around
  addressing technical issues as they arise.
- **The Right Hand**. This role gives the executive layer of an organization
  some additional technical bandwidth, operating with "borrowed" scope and
  influence as a delegate to help reduce the load for the leader(s) that they
  support.

In my experience, these archetypes accurately represent the types of Staff
Engineers that exist in the wild, **however**, your organization may not have
some or all of these archetypes represented (depending on the organization's
needs).

## The Product Staff Engineer

Bringing together the focus of a Product Engineer with the role of a Staff
Engineer, we can define what the role of a Product Staff Engineer might look
like.

First, I want to make it clear that I don't believe "Product Staff Engineer" to
be a *title*, but rather it is more descriptive of a *focus*. **A product-focused
Staff Engineer is still just a Staff Engineer in title and scope**, but they
operate primarily in the product problem space.

A Product Staff Engineer, as with any Staff-plus role, will first and foremost
be responsible for taking on work that allows them to provide the highest impact
for their organization. That may mean stepping **outside** of their focus area,
even temporarily, to drive change.

A Product Staff Engineer should also seek to guide best practices and influence
the technical direction of the product. This means being closely involved with
Product and Design stakeholders, understanding how different parts of the
product fit together, and understanding user needs and pain points.

It's very important for a Product Staff Engineer to remember that **they do not
need to be the individual to solve a given problem**. A product and it's
business logic at any significant scale will likely become nuanced and fluid
enough that it may not be possible for one person to understand exactly how it
all works. Instead, their job as a technical leader is to ensure that the right
people are in the room and involved in the decision making process.

A Product Staff Engineer has the knowledge and influence to define and
evangelize a coherent and unifying technical vision for their product. This
should not be done in a vacuum, but rather with input and feedback from experts
across the product. This is a unique and awesome power to wield, and as a
technical leader in the product space it will be the Product Staff Engineers
most impactful tool.

## Summary

What differentiates a Product Staff Engineer from any other Staff Engineering
role is their expertise and focus on the technical aspects of the product. This
is more of a focus area than a title, and the responsibilities of a Staff
Engineer in general may require stepping outside of this focus area if needed.

As a Product Staff Engineer, your role is to guide the best practices, technical
direction, and any other components of a unified vision for your product
codebase. This involves a keen sense of awareness of the needs of your Product
leaders and the users of your product.
