---
layout: post
title:  "Forming the Right Relationships"
date:   2024-09-09
categories: technology
---
Forming relationships with the right people in your organization is a critical
part of understanding where and how you can generate impact as a Product Staff
Engineer. But who are these people, and how do you form these relationships in a
meaningful way?

## Why form relationships?

Building relationships with the right groups and individuals in your
organization is an important part of the role for any Staff Engineer. These
relationships keep you informed on whats going on around your organization,
helps keep **others** informed on what you're working on, and maybe most
importantly, opens doors for you to be involved in planning and decision
making.

These things are catalysts for identifying where and how you can exercise your
expertise and influence to generate impact.

## Who to build relationships with?

Some of these recommendations will exist no matter the size of your technical
organizations, while others may only exist in larger organizations.

### Product Management

If you have a product, you probably have Product Managers. Building
relationships with the Product leaders in your organization is an important
asset for Product Staff Engineers.

Product Managers are responsible for the success of the product through defining
strategy and roadmaps and planning feature work. Staying close to the long term
vision for the product can help you guide near term solutions that will unlock
future work.

You also have an asset that benefits Product Managers - the ability to provide
"t-shirt" sizing, or cost estimates for upcoming work, and to identify potential
blockers or technical debt that might need resolving first.

### Engineering Leadership

This should be an obvious one - keeping close and productive relationships with
engineering leadership (Engineering Management, Directors, VPs, the CTO, and
your fellow Staff+ engineers) is an essential tool.

These are busy people, so you don't want to block off their calendars or
distract them without purpose, but that purpose could also be as simple as
checking in on a targeted technical topic or as deep as discussing new technical
initiatives.

The higher up the org chart that you go with these individuals, the more value
you will need to provide. At the highest rungs, such as the CTO level, you may
not be able to catalyze this relationship on your own. You may need to already
be providing significant value or have generated enough influence for this
relationship to form.

### Product / Business Analytics

A niche relationship, but a useful one in the product engineering space. These
individuals instrument and monitor metrics that track the health of the product.

Your org will likely have a business-critical suite of metrics that are measured
quarter over quarter and year over year, but you'll likely also have more
specific business metrics that track more granular feature sets.

Building relationships with Product / Business Analytics experts can help you
understand how users are interacting with the product and help inform decision
making around technical investments.

### Adjacent Teams

This is especially useful if your duties as a Staff Engineer are tied closely to
one product team or a grouping of teams.

There is a lot of value in building trust and relationships with teams in
domains that are adjacent to your own. For example, if your team owns the
subscription component of your product, it could be very useful to be close with
the Payments Platform team.

These relationships not only make changes and new functionality in shared
domains less opaque, but also helps to organically build a more unified vision
across domains over time.

### Trusted Engineers

A Staff Engineer cannot and should not try to solve every problem on their own.
Delegation is one of the most powerful tools in your arsenal, and is a skill
that requires exercising.

Through day to day work and mentoring experiences, identify engineers in our
organization who you believe are ready for elevated responsibilities, and who
you can trust to do the work that needs to be done. Look for engineers who are
ready for growth opportunities and who you believe are capable of taking on the
work.

This is a vector for scaled impact as a Staff Engineer. Hoarding work,
especially work that does nothing to help you grow, will slow you and your
organization down. But delegation spreads growth opportunities around and
parallelizes the work that needs to be done.

Celebrate the success of these engineers and help guide when you believe things
might be going off track, but otherwise **let them succeed**. Even if their
approach might not be *exactly* how you would do it, it's important to guide and
not to dictate.

## How to maintain relationships?

This is the hard part. Maintaining these relationships so that they don't
atrophy is time consuming and can be a bit disheartening if the interest doesn't
seem to be reciprocated. Here are a few general ways in which you can make sure
these relationships have the best chance to stick:

**Prioritize them appropriately**. Identify which relationships are the most
productive and impactful, and prioritize those over others. Perhaps your Product
Manager finds weekly 1:1 meetings with you very informative, and you find a lot
of value in being able to provide feedback on upcoming product initiatives
earlier on in the process. On the other hand, your Business Analytics partner is
often busy or distracted when you reach out to them. In this case, prioritize
your relationship with your Product Manager, and consider finding an alternative
approach to making your relationship with Business Analytics more appealing to
them.

**Find the right cadence**. Nobody wants to show up to a weekly meeting and find
out that nobody has anything useful to discuss this week. Find the right cadence
for each relationship, and reevaluate as you go. Maybe you have weekly meetings
with Engineering Leadership that are high value, but your Product Manager really
only has new topics for you every other week. Find this cadence and check in
over time to ensure that its still the right approach.

**Don't waste anyone's time, including your own**. Again, nobody wants to show
up to a meeting and find our that nobody has anything useful to discuss. **Come
prepared** with topics, or cancel the meeting before it happens. If meetings
aren't working no matter the cadence, consider an alternative approach like
sharing useful updates via Slack as they come up. If you aren't providing value,
forcing time on someone's schedule is likely to do more harm than good to that
relationship.

These are just a few **strategic** ways in which you can maintain good
relationships with the right people in your organization. This list is not
exhaustive, and these alone are no substitute for basic human relationship
building (be friendly, value others, and listen).

## Wrapping up

In this write up, we've detailed a few important relationships that a
product-focused Staff Engineer should nurture. These are not a substitute for
basic relationship building within your team and organization, but are powerful
additions to your network.

Beyond all, a Staff Engineer must be trusted by others. Building and nurturing
relationships with those who can help hone your focus on the product will allow
you to make more informed, impactful decisions and build the trust and influence
necessary to be a technical leader in your organization.
